From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[Music]
Tariffs are at their highest rate in
nearly a century. The labor market is
weakening. Over and over again, Trump
has meddled with corporate America and
the country's most important economic
institutions.
And yet, the S&P at an all-time high.
Same for the NASDAQ, by the way.
>> The stock market has kept on going up
and up and up. Markets continue to hit
all-time highs. All of this despite
lingering uncertainty caused by
President Trump's tariff agenda. Today,
my colleague Joe Renison explains why,
at least until now, the market has
stayed so strong in such volatile times
and what we know about how long this can
really last.
It's Monday, October 20th.
>> Wow. You brought a Bloomberg terminal
print out today.
>> In case you ask me what companies have
done well since tariffs, then I'll be
prepared.
>> It's beautiful. I just caught a glimpse
of it and that orange that bright orange
letter.
>> It's very distinctive, isn't it?
>> Yeah. You can't miss it. Yeah. Um, well,
Joe, welcome to the show. Thanks for
being in the studio.
>> Thanks ever so so much for having me.
So, we're coming to you because there
has been this question on my mind for a
while now, and I think it's been on a
lot of people's minds. And the question
is, what is up with the markets? Because
it seems as though every few weeks or
so, something happens. Whether it's a
new Trump policy, whether it's weak jobs
data, whether it's new tariffs, and at
least for the past few months or so, the
market has not really had a huge or
lasting reaction to those things. Now, a
week ago, we did see a decline when
Trump threatened new China tariffs, but
then the markets seem to recover. And at
this point, they've been in all-time
high territory for a while. And the
mystery for me has been, how can that
be? How can it be that all these
theoretically destabilizing events are
not seriously rattling investors?
>> Right? Well, you're not alone. There's
plenty of people asking that exact same
question right now. And it makes sense
from a sort of intuitive perspective
when you see so much what at least some
people would describe as chaos or at
least unorthodox things happening in the
world. Why hasn't there been a stronger
reaction in financial markets? Surely
there is an economic consequence to
these things. And so it is an important
question and it's an important question
as well because it's important to
understand what the signal is from the
stock market. you know, markets are
still doing very well. Should we take
that as a sign that things are okay?
Maybe we're being hyperbolic and we're
being worried about nothing. And so, if
that is the signal markets are sending,
we should listen to that. Equally, if
there's another explanation, we should
understand that explanation as well.
>> So, you're saying the signals the market
sends matter.
>> Yeah.
>> What do you mean by that? You know,
believe it or not, a majority of
Americans are actually invested in the
stock market either through retirement
plans or pension plans or the rise of
retail investors day trading that kind
of picked up during the pandemic. And
then while the stock market might not be
the economy and maybe it doesn't feel
like it has this kind of direct effect
on most Americans lives, the companies
in the stock market are huge employers.
They employ thousands and thousands of
people. They are responsible for the
paychecks of many many Americans. And if
those companies start to do worse or
start to come under pressure, that tends
to affect how they spend money in the
economy, whether that's on labor or
infrastructure projects or whatever it
happens to be. So there is this kind of
relationship between markets in the
economy, even if they don't always send
exactly the same message. And they're
also forward-looking. So markets are
constantly trying to understand where we
go, not where we are now. And so they're
a really good barometer in a sense of
where the many many investors that are
putting money to work every single day
buying and selling stocks, bonds,
currencies, and other things, where do
they see things headed? And again, at
the moment, from a very cursory look at
the financial markets, one would think
that people think we're on a reasonably
safe path.
>> Okay. Well, let's get into the signals
that we are getting from investors right
now. It feels like maybe one of the most
helpful recent examples of that kind of
barometer that you're talking about was
during the initial market reaction to
Trump's tariffs back in the spring. The
market, the stock market and the bond
market reaction in particular were
initially negative. Many people saw that
as a strong signal to the
administration. The administration pulls
back. It's not surprising that the
market recovered once Trump retreated
from those initial really high tariffs.
But what was surprising to me was that
the markets kept going up and up. Even
though Trump did eventually raise tariff
rates, it was more gradual, but those
tariffs hit multiple sectors and
multiple countries. Can you just explain
that? Break that down for me.
>> Absolutely. So coming into this year,
we're in a pretty good place. There was
some enthusiasm around Trump being
elected, a sort of more pro business
president, at least perceived to be a
more pro business president and a sort
of unleashing of growth and opportunity
in the US for big business. And then the
tariffs hit and whilst these were
expected, they came through a lot more
punitive, a lot more harsh than
investors had anticipated. And so there
was a sharp reaction. And the reason
that sharp reaction kind of hit almost
more than the tariffs themselves, almost
more than sort of what it said about the
direction of travel for the
administration was that it was
unexpected.
>> Markets investors hate uncertainty. They
can't price uncertainty. It's impossible
to price what you don't know,
>> right? whether the economy could sustain
through such a shock, whether the
employment market would come under
strain, whether inflation would rapidly
rise. And so you ended up with this kind
of paralyzing of business and financial
markets because they just didn't know
what was going to happen. Now, where we
are now, sure, there's still a lot of
uncertainty in the world, but we at
least roughly know what the base rate on
tariffs is going to be. We roughly know,
we at least have some data on what the
income from tariffs looks like to the
government,
>> which is considerable, right?
>> Yeah. Much higher than people were
anticipating initially. We've seen
inflation not get out of control. Yes,
there's pressure on inflation, but it's
not got out of control. There's an awful
lot that we've just had a little bit of
time to kind of analyze, get our head
around to a point where there is at
least less uncertainty than there was 6
months ago. So, it sounds like what
you're saying is we moved from this
really unpredictable environment to a
relatively at least more predictable one
and that with that shift, some of the
anxiety has fallen away.
>> Yeah, exactly. Certainly, some of the
big causes of constellation and
uncertainty have eased somewhat. And it
isn't just tariffs. We also have the big
beautiful bill, the tax cut that went
through. It's an extension of a tax cut,
but it still is a tailwind for the
market. Fed looks like it's now lowering
interest rates. Those lower interest
rates will also offer a tailwind to the
market. It reduces borrowing costs. It
broadly reduces costs for companies in
the stock market.
>> Tax cuts and reduced interest rates are
two things that businesses love. Good
news.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> So there's more certainty in a bunch of
areas. Tariffs, taxes, and interest
rates. Isn't there though, Joe, still a
lot of uncertainty just at a systemic
level? As in, aren't there concerns
about how much trust we can have in the
ability of the most important economic
institutions in this country to do their
jobs like the Fed, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. These have both been
attacked by Trump. He's moved to fire a
Fed governor. He fired the head of the
labor agency. What's the impact of all
that?
>> There is absolutely concern around these
sorts of things. Whether that gets
reflected in markets is a little bit
different. Markets aren't moral. They
don't have a system of governance that
they are wedded to. What they
fundamentally care about is that policy,
especially monetary policy coming from
the Federal Reserve, is consistent with
the sort of economic fundamentals that
we're facing. In authoritarian
governments, that can sometimes become
dislocated where the politicians are
making those decisions, not the policy
makers. And then you can end up with
economic policy that doesn't fit the
economy you have. And that can lead to
some very unpleasant results, let's say.
We're not in that situation. We're in a
situation where yes, the administration
is putting a lot of pressure on the
Federal Reserve. They're putting
pressure on Federal Reserve independents
through the attempt to fire Lisa Cook,
>> the Fed governor.
>> Yeah. But at least for now, the policy
that they are pushing through is
consistent with the economic
fundamentals we're facing. So the fact
that Jerome Powell is now lowering
interest rates is more a coincidence
that that's what Trump wants as well.
because you know for a large chunk of
this year Trump wanted lower interest
rates and it was not the right time and
Pal didn't want to do that.
>> Now they're aligned and so whether
that's a question of independence or
lack of independence if the policy fits
the market then the market will be okay.
>> You're saying that the markets don't see
the Fed's move to lower interest rates
as a response to Trump pressure. They
see it as a response to the economic
signals.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. But the Fed is cutting interest
rates in part because of weakness in the
labor market. Isn't that concerning to
investors that weakness?
>> It is, but we're at the very early days
of that right now. The labor market is
still by historical measures very, very
strong. Unemployment is still very, very
low. The Fed is sensing or seeing in the
data some turn in that strength. We are
starting to see unemployment tick up
slightly. we are starting to see the
number of jobs added sort of slowing
down and so they're trying to get ahead
of this before the labor market actually
buckles and cracks and we get to that
point.
>> So all of this it helps explain why the
markets aren't reacting very strongly to
some of the more extreme Trump moves. It
doesn't totally explain though why we're
in alltime high territory. What's behind
that? What's that story?
>> Yeah, sure. So I think it's good that
we're coming to this point now because
there is a really big driving force in
the market right now and that's
artificial intelligence. The enthusiasm
over the sort of transformational
potential of AI is driving the stock
market through the roof because the
biggest companies that stand to benefit
from AI adoption are listed in the US.
These companies have grown
astronomically over the past sort of
four years or so and they have become
these bares in the market. You have the
magnificent 7 which is a name given to a
group of seven stocks. It includes
Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta,
Microsoft, Nvidia and Tesla. Those seven
companies now are more than a third of
the S&P 500.
>> Wow, I didn't know that.
>> Right. So there's 500 companies, seven
of them are dictating a third of the
price.
>> That's unbelievable.
>> So if you get a 2% rise in Nvidia one
day, it's really hard for the S&P 500 to
be down.
>> A huge impact. Totally outsized.
>> Exactly. Big big outsiz impact of the
stock prices of just a handful of
companies. And all of those companies
pretty much are fairly intertwined with
artificial intelligence. Mhm.
>> And you know when you have such driving
force as artificial intelligence in the
market, this is a potentially
transformational technology that could
drive profits in the stock market for a
long time. So even if you're kind of
worried about the attack on the Fed's
independence or some of the geopolitical
situations that are playing out, you
probably don't want to miss out on a
generational technology that will really
bolster US markets, the US economy
because other people around the world
are going to want to be invested in that
trade as well. And that brings money
into the US,
>> right? It's just very hard to sit this
out on the sidelines right now.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> Okay. And what about the concerns that
this AI boom could really just be a big
bubble that that these companies are
overvalued that they may not deliver on
their promise?
>> Yeah, it's a concern. Jamie Diamond, the
chief executive of JP Morgan, biggest
bank in the US, he warned of something
similar. The market does seem
overvalued. It does seem a little bit
frothy. There is room for a pullback
here. And all we have to look at are
some of the sort of classical market
metrics for assessing valuation. And on
pretty much all of those, let's take a
company like Nvidia for example, we're
blasting through historical precedent.
>> We're way outside of normal ranges on
what you would pay for a company with
the sort of current track record behind
it. And the expectations, you know, when
you pay more for a share,
the idea at least behind that is that
you think this company is going to be
able to make that money in the future
and give it back to you, you're trying
to profit, right? So, if you're paying
more for something, you think it's going
to make more money over the long term.
And while some of these numbers look
bananas on a piece of paper, Nvidia has
met a lot of these targets in recent
years. Like, this is a $500 billion
company in 2021 that is now over $4
trillion.
And so, when Nvidia hit a trillion, do
you start saying, "Well, it looks a bit
overvalued." When Nvidia hits $2
trillion, do you think it's overvalued?
It's 4 trillion. Is it overvalued or is
it actually worth 8 trillion? I don't
know. And I don't think a lot of
investors know for sure either. With
almost any big fundamental change,
whether it's crypto and Bitcoin or
whether it's artificial intelligence or
whether it's the internet, these sorts
of technologies, to some extent at
least, when you don't have the full set
of numbers you need to value a company,
it comes down to belief. Part of what
you're saying is that while this could
be a bubble, all of this AI investment,
even in that scenario, it's very hard
for investors to not throw their money
into this sector because the potential
windfall that comes from making the
right bet on the right company is just
huge.
>> Yeah. And the and the risk of being
uninvested in this environment is like
you can fall behind very very quickly
>> as an investor. Maybe it's worth sort of
looking back to the.com period. The
internet revolution, the computing
revolution that kind of taken hold
earlier. Those things are still with us.
The technologies are still here.
Artificial intelligence isn't going to
be going away anytime soon. The
difference is which companies are going
to actually still be around in 5 or 10
years. Is it going to be a case of one
of the many companies that went bust in
20201 or is it going to be a case of
being Amazon which was also valued?
in similar ways that were also off the
chart in 1999, that company is still
here and it would have made you an awful
lot of money to be invested over those
25 years.
>> One of the concerns that comes up with
this, however, is that because of the
size of these companies and because of
how well they've been performing more
recently, they're also able to then mask
a lot of the pain that sort of sits just
beneath the surface of the stock market.
M
>> it's quite possible to have a large
chunk of the S&P 500 for example down on
a day where some idiosyncratic news
about Nvidia or Amazon that lifts those
stocks 1 2% can outweigh moves in the
opposite direction amongst a large chunk
of the index. So it kind of comes back
to the message that the market is
sending us on any given day that the S&P
500 rises. Maybe that is a verdict on
the administration's policies. Maybe
that is a verdict on the economy at
large. But maybe it's also just
artificial intelligence.
>> H
>> and if you're only looking at that
highle number whether the S&P 500 has
risen or fallen, then you may be missing
some of the underlying concern that
still sits beneath the surface.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So let's talk about some of those
underlying concerns, these warning signs
in the markets. What are you seeing? So,
one of the most obvious would be gold.
Gold has been rising for a while at this
point, but it's really taken off in
recent months. We've gone above $4,000
on gold for the first time. And the
signal that sends is one of worry. Why
do people buy gold? It doesn't offer any
return. It's not going to enrich you in
the way that maybe a rapidly rising
stock will. You go there because you
don't want to lose money. It's less
about making money. It's more about not
losing that money. People tend to invest
in gold when they're feeling insecure.
>> Yeah, exactly. And we've seen central
banks around the world move more into
gold. That's a bit of a shift away from
dollar assets. That's a concern about
the sort of safety and soundness of US
markets kind of continuing in the way
that they have for so long. We're also
seeing some of that reflected in money
moving away from the US stock market.
Yes, we have these big tech companies
that are leading and are at the
forefront of AI, but we've also had that
for a while. So, there's been a lot of
money come in from international markets
into the US market chasing those
returns. We're starting to see that eb a
little bit.
>> We're seeing more money going into
European markets or other emerging
markets as people dial down some of
their exposure to the US.
>> Got it. So, so far you've talked about
gold, the prices going up, that being a
sign of of potential unease. You've
talked about money moving into
international markets. What else?
>> Perhaps one of the most obvious or
classic signs of concern is in defaults.
So, companies unable to pay their debts
back and actually going into either
bankruptcy or having to negotiate with
their creditors. We saw this recently in
the subprime auto lending space. So, car
loans to people that are considered
risky borrowers.
>> It does hint and show there is some
fraying of the strength of the consumer
that has driven the economy since the
pandemic and there is some sign that
consumers are coming under strain. If
that follows through, you can see how
that lowers consumer spending at big box
stores. You can then see how that flows
through into the stock market as
revenues decline for some of those
companies and things like that. It
sounds like more than just a red flag
for markets. Those rising defaults are a
sign that like a growing number of
people in the regular real economy are
are struggling.
>> Yeah, it is. But it is still at the
margin. It's not broad-based yet.
>> When we started talking, I mentioned
that there had been this drop in the
markets after Trump threatened new China
tariffs. We know obviously that the US
China trade negotiations have not been
resolved. Having two major economic
superpowers in an escalating trade war
certainly doesn't seem like it would
bode well for investors. Is anyone
you're talking to worried about these
tensions heating up again?
>> Yeah, absolutely. It remains a sort of
outstanding cause of concern. This is
the big trading relationship. This is
the one that really matters. And if
there is a sense that that relationship
is breaking down, then yeah, markets are
going to react to that. We saw that this
month with some of the back and forth
between DC and Beijing where you know
Trump comes out sort of threatens these
100% tariffs on China and that prompted
a very strong reaction. It shows this
sensitivity to the unknown to the
potential for a crisis coming out of
left field. There are definitely still
these risks looming out there and
investors are sensitive to them.
>> So Joe, how worried should we be? H how
should we be interpreting these warning
signs? Is it a signal that the historic
run that we've been on is about to end?
>> I don't know.
Uh
>> darn it.
>> Yeah,
>> I was really hoping you did.
>> Um yeah, I don't know. It's kind of
fascinating in a sort of purely
intellectual way, but it it's also
baffling in its own right to see how
little effect maybe some of the things
that we think of as being very impactful
in our own lives have not necessarily
translated into financial markets. But
it also hopefully uh at the end of this
conversation makes a little bit of sense
in the sense that the reality that
companies are dealing with, the reality
that investors are dealing with is not
that bad. You know, I think a lot of
people will feel maddened by some of
this, especially those who are being
affected by Trump's policies. Yeah. You
know, I'm thinking of thousands of
federal workers, you know, who who who
don't have a job or or the small
businesses who are struggling with
tariffs
>> because I think people at least going
into this term, they expected markets to
be a guard rail, to be a check on the
president, for them to be maybe one of
the only effective checks on the
president's most extreme instincts. And
that just doesn't seem to be happening.
>> Yeah, you're right. People certainly did
come into this year expecting markets to
be more of a guard rail than they have
been. But you know when investors are
actually confronted with the landscape
in front of them, they have to consider
the good and the bad. Companies are
earning. We've had double digit earnings
growth in the first quarter and in the
second quarter and we're looking like we
might get it in the third quarter as
well as we go into earning season now.
And you know, when you consider the
attack on Fed independence, when you
consider some of the more extreme
policies that have kind of come out from
this administration, when you consider
all these things, do you think Nvidia or
Google or Apple, these big companies are
not going to be making a lot of money in
5 years
>> or two years?
>> I think they're probably going to be
doing all right. And I don't often have
opinions.
That's pretty much the mildest opinion I
think anyone can have. think so.
>> Um, and so, you know, sometimes it's
just answering a different question than
the one investors are asking of it. And
that's kind of why we are where we are.
>> You're saying basically that the markets
are filtering all the noise of the
volatility in this Trump term or or
maybe investors are just holding their
nose because they can't resist the pull
of AI.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean I I speak to a lot of
investors who have talked about how
they've evolved their investment process
a little bit this year, learning
somewhat from the first Trump term, but
then also just trying to really, as you
said, filter out the noise. What's real?
You know, if Joe Biden had tweeted
something that resembled a policy
announcement one random afternoon, then
markets would have responded to it and
they'd have reacted very quickly because
they'd have taken it seriously. We don't
have that level of reaction function now
because there is a sense that
>> you know and I do not mean this with any
kind of value judgment attached to it
but
>> the sense at least among investors is
that this administration says and does a
lot of stuff that doesn't actually
happen
>> that changes the next day and so I think
investors have really started to try not
to react to those more superfluous
things and instead focus on what's
what's actually happened, what's
actually been said and done rather than
what might happen.
>> So to a certain extent, markets have
kind of become inured to the daily
seessaw of drama that maybe affects us
regular folks a little more. I guess my
question is, is there a way in which
Trump has also affected the tolerance of
investors for the actual things he's
doing in some way by throwing us all
into this kind of crazy experiment of
what unprecedented tariff rates will do
to an economy and what unprecedented
levels of government intervention will
do? Has he made us more comfortable with
some things that before we might have
thought were a little out of bounds? You
know, has he normalized these moves to
the point where investors are just
adapting to them?
>> Yeah. You know, if you'd asked an
economist in January, what would
introducing the highest tariffs in what
a century do to the economy? I don't
think they'd have said, "Well, I'm
pretty sure the S&P 500 will be at a new
record,"
>> right?
>> Um, but we are in that position. So, we
can look at what's happening to
companies. We can look at what's
happening to the data. We can look at
what companies are doing in response to
these increased costs. We can see
whether they're trying to absorb those
costs or pass them on to consumers. And
certainly, for the first half of the
year, it looked like they were absorbing
those costs. Now, it's looking like
they're beginning to start passing those
on to consumers. that would potentially
be another warning sign. But you
actually end up just having to look at
what's really happening, not the sort of
gut check or emotional response to
what's happening. It has to be the
reality of it and how does it affect
company profitability. We could easily
see a future in which the sort of
positives driving the market continue to
outweigh and I can see a future where
some of those negatives that are
beginning to creep in could also
outweigh. But at least for now, a lot of
the worst fears that were sort of
surrounding this stuff at the beginning
of the year have not been met yet.
[Music]
Oh, and before I let you go, I want to
actually make use of that printout that
you brought. That was supposed to help
you answer a question about what
companies have done well since Trump
instituted all these tariffs. So, let's
hear it. Who's killing it? Oh my
goodness. All right, let's look at the
scores on the board. Looking at this
piece of paper in front of me, it's very
clear why the market has been doing so
well. There's seven companies on here
that have risen more than 100% since the
start of April.
>> Wow.
>> That's doubling in value. There's
Broadcom, Palunteer, Oracle, companies
that have done big business with the
government. It's pretty staggering.
>> I was really hoping you were going to
say the New York Times.
>> Alas. Alas. But it's easy looking at
that list to understand why the market
is doing okay.
>> Well, Joe, thanks so much.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
here's what else you should know today.
>> We want
>> across the country on Saturday, large
crowds gathered for dayong no kings
protests against President Trump.
The rallies took place in small towns
and big cities and drew particularly
large turnouts in Washington DC, New
York, and Chicago.
>> The demonstrations were aimed at calling
out what protesters see as the
authoritarian actions of the president
and were largely peaceful.
>> Will we sit by while the president slow
walks us into authoritarianism?
[Music]
>> Will we bend the knee or grace?
[Applause]
And on Sunday, Israel launched its
heaviest attacks on Gaza since a
ceasefire took hold a week ago and
suspended humanitarian aid to the
enclave after accusing Hamas of
violating the truce by killing two
Israeli soldiers.
By nightfall, following a series of
significant strikes, the Israeli
military said it had quote begun the
renewed enforcement of the ceasefire.
Gaza's health officials reported 44
Palestinian deaths across the territory
on Sunday. The flare up of violence and
the temporary halt in aid were the most
serious tests yet of the ceasefire,
which was negotiated under heavy
pressure from the White House and signed
by Trump himself.
Finally, in a brazen daylight robbery at
the Louve Museum in Paris, thieves made
off with jewelry of incalculable value.
According to France's interior minister,
the heist unfolded around 9:30 a.m. when
thieves used a lift mechanism on a truck
to break into the museum and snatch
eight precious objects before fleeing on
motor scooters with their loot. All
within just 7 minutes.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Anna
Foley, Ricky Novetsky, and Stella Tan.
It was edited by Lisa Chow with help
from Mark George. Contains music by
Marian Lozano and Diane Wong and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Ketro.
See you tomorrow.